---
layout: post
title:  "The public PESO dataset: prostate H&E whole-side images for epithelium segmentation"
date:   2019-07-29 16:17
categories: blog tech
tags: [deep learning, prostate cancer, immunohistochemistry, epithelium segmentation]
published: true
description: ""
include_ha_series: false
#image: /assets/images/gleason-grading/gleason_grading_social_image.png
#lazyload_standalone: true
#large_twitter_card: true
---

As part of our publication on [epithelium segmentation using deep learning and immunohistochemistry](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-018-37257-4) we published our dataset on Zenodo: the [PESO dataset](https://zenodo.org/record/1485967#.XT8F0ugzb8A). The dataset is free to use under the BY-NC-SA Creative Commons license.

## Contents of the dataset

The PESO dataset consists of a `training` and `test` part. For the training part the reference standard is included. This set consists of:

- 62 whole-slide images, exported at a pixel resolution of 0.48mu/pixels.
- 62 Raw color deconvolution masks containing the P63&CK8/18 channel of the color deconvolution operation. These masks mark all regions that are stained by either P63 or CK8/18 in the IHC version of the slides.
- 25 color deconvolution masks (N=25) on which manual annotations have been made. Within these regions, stain and other artifacts have been removed.
- 62 training masks (N=62) that have been used to train the main network of our paper. These masks are generated by a trained U-Net on the corresponding IHC slides.

The test set consists of:

- 40 whole-slide images, exported at a pixel resolution of 0.48mu/pixels.
- 40 xml files containing a total of 160 annotation of regions that are used in the original evaluation.
- 160 png files of 2500x2500 pixels, exported at a pixel resolution of 0.48mu/pixels. Each png file corresponds to one test region.
- 160 padded png files of 3500x3500 pixels of the same test regions.
- A mapping file (csv) describing whether a test region contains cancer or only benign tissue.
